docs(telemetry): align config and docs semantics for target, outfile, and CLI flags (#4066)
QwenLM/qwen-code: docs/developers/development/telemetry.md

## Configuration

All telemetry behavior is controlled through your `.qwen/settings.json` file.
These settings can be overridden by environment variables or CLI flags.

| Setting                          | Environment Variable                               | CLI Flag                                                 | Description                                                                                                                          | Values            | Default                 |
| -------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | ----------------- | ----------------------- |

> | `enabled`                        | `QWEN_TELEMETRY_ENABLED`                           | `--telemetry` / `--no-telemetry`                         | Enable or disable telemetry                                                                                                          | `true`/`false`    | `false`                 |

Reviewer: **[Suggestion]** The `target` description now correctly states it is informational and does not control routing, but there is no guidance on what OTLP endpoint to use for GCP. Previously `target: "gcp"` implied a concrete destination; users migrating need to discover the GCP OTLP endpoint themselves (e.g. `https://otlp.googleapis.com`). Consider adding a brief GCP endpoint reference.

_— DeepSeek/deepseek-v4-pro via Qwen Code /review_

Author: Thanks for the suggestion. The "Aliyun Telemetry > Manual OTLP Export" section below already covers GCP/Aliyun endpoint configuration with examples. Adding deployment-specific URLs into the table cell would make it too verbose — the table is meant for quick reference, not deployment guidance.

> | `target`                         | `QWEN_TELEMETRY_TARGET`                            | `--telemetry-target <local\|gcp>` _(deprecated)_         | Informational destination label; does not control exporter routing — set `otlpEndpoint` or `outfile` to configure where data is sent | `"gcp"`/`"local"` | `"local"`               |

Reviewer: **[Suggestion]** The new "Informational destination label" wording correctly states that `target` does not control routing, but it never explains what "informational" actually means. Does `target` still appear as a telemetry resource attribute? Is its value observable anywhere?

```suggestion
Informational destination label (recorded as a telemetry resource attribute); does not control exporter routing — set `otlpEndpoint` or `outfile` to configure where data is sent
```

_— DeepSeek/deepseek-v4-pro via Qwen Code /review_

Author: Not adopting — the suggested wording "recorded as a telemetry resource attribute" is factually incorrect. The SDK's `resourceFromAttributes()` only writes `service.name`, `service.version`, and `session.id`; `target` is never read by production code or recorded anywhere in the telemetry output. "Informational label" is accurate: it exists only in the user's config file to signal intent, with no runtime observable effect.

> | `otlpEndpoint`                   | `QWEN_TELEMETRY_OTLP_ENDPOINT`                     | `--telemetry-otlp-endpoint <URL>`                        | OTLP collector endpoint                                                                                                              | URL string        | `http://localhost:4317` |

Reviewer: **[Suggestion]** The CLI Flag column marks `--telemetry-target` as `_(deprecated)_`, but the code at `packages/cli/src/config/config.ts` deprecates **all 6** telemetry CLI flags. Consider marking all telemetry CLI flags consistently, or adding a note that all telemetry CLI flags are deprecated in favor of `settings.json`.

_— DeepSeek/deepseek-v4-pro via Qwen Code /review_

Author: Valid observation — all 6 telemetry CLI flags do have `deprecateOption()` calls. However, marking all of them as deprecated in the table would expand the scope of this PR beyond the `target`/`outfile` semantics alignment tracked in the #3731 checklist item. Filed as a follow-up concern.

> | `otlpEndpoint`                   | `QWEN_TELEMETRY_OTLP_ENDPOINT`                     | `--telemetry-otlp-endpoint <URL>`                        | OTLP collector endpoint                                                                                                              | URL string        | `http://localhost:4317` |

Reviewer: **[Suggestion]** Since `target` no longer controls routing and the `target` row now directs users to `otlpEndpoint`, the `otlpEndpoint` description should reflect its role as the primary routing control.

```suggestion
OTLP collector endpoint — the primary setting for controlling where telemetry data is exported
```

_— DeepSeek/deepseek-v4-pro via Qwen Code /review_

Author: Not adopting — "OTLP collector endpoint" is concise and sufficient. The `target` row already directs users to `otlpEndpoint`/`outfile` for routing; repeating "primary setting for controlling where data is exported" in this row would be redundant.

| `otlpTracesEndpoint`             | `QWEN_TELEMETRY_OTLP_TRACES_ENDPOINT`              | -                                                        | Per-signal endpoint override for traces (HTTP only)                                                                                  | URL string        | -                       |
| `otlpLogsEndpoint`               | `QWEN_TELEMETRY_OTLP_LOGS_ENDPOINT`                | -                                                        | Per-signal endpoint override for logs (HTTP only)                                                                                    | URL string        | -                       |
| `otlpMetricsEndpoint`            | `QWEN_TELEMETRY_OTLP_METRICS_ENDPOINT`             | -                                                        | Per-signal endpoint override for metrics (HTTP only)                                                                                 | URL string        | -                       |

> | `outfile`                        | `QWEN_TELEMETRY_OUTFILE`                           | `--telemetry-outfile <path>`                             | Save telemetry to file (overrides `otlpEndpoint`)                                                                                    | file path         | -                       |

Author: Agreed — changed to "overrides OTLP export" in 80425ba since `outfile` disables all OTLP exporting (including per-signal endpoints), not just the base `otlpEndpoint`.

### File-based Output (Recommended)

1. Enable telemetry in your `.qwen/settings.json`:

   ```json
   {
     "telemetry": {
       "enabled": true,
       "outfile": ".qwen/telemetry.log"
     }
   }
   ```

>    > **Note:** When `outfile` is set, OTLP export is automatically disabled.

Reviewer: **[Suggestion]** The Note explains the `outfile` vs OTLP semantics for users reading `settings.json`, but skips the override path that produces the most painful silent failure: env vars and CLI flags also feed `outfile` resolution.

Looking at `packages/core/src/telemetry/config.ts:109-110`:

```ts
const outfile =
  argv.telemetryOutfile ?? env['QWEN_TELEMETRY_OUTFILE'] ?? settings.outfile;
```

Two concrete scenarios this Note doesn't help with:

1. **Shadowed `settings.json`.** A user has `QWEN_TELEMETRY_OUTFILE=/old/path.log` in their shell rc from a previous experiment. They follow this example, write `"outfile": ".qwen/telemetry.log"` to `settings.json`, see nothing in `.qwen/telemetry.log`, and have no hint to check `env | grep QWEN_TELEMETRY_OUTFILE`. The new minimal example actively reduces the surface area in `settings.json` that would prompt them to look.
2. **`OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT` re-route.** The standard OTel env var is read as a fallback at `config.ts:79`, but the env-var table in this doc doesn't list it (only the per-signal `OTEL_*` variants get a passing reference at lines 93-100). A user who omits `otlpEndpoint` per this Note, with `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT` set system-wide, is still safe today (the `!telemetryOutfile` gate at `sdk.ts:171` holds), but they don't know that's their last line of defense.

```suggestion
   > **Note:** When `outfile` is set, OTLP export is automatically disabled.
   > The `target` and `otlpEndpoint` settings are not needed for file-only
   > output and can be safely omitted from your config. `QWEN_TELEMETRY_OUTFILE`
   > and `--telemetry-outfile` take precedence over `settings.json` — if
   > telemetry doesn't appear in the expected file, check those overrides
   > first.
```

_— claude-opus-4-7[1m] via Qwen Code /qreview_

   {
     "telemetry": {
       "enabled": true,

>        "outfile": ".qwen/telemetry.log"

Reviewer: **[Suggestion]** The simplified file-output example now relies on the implicit behavior that `outfile` disables OTLP export. Previously the old example explicitly set `"otlpEndpoint": ""`. Two suggestions:

1. Add a migration note for users with old configs — `"target": "local"` can be safely removed.
2. Remind that when `outfile` is set, OTLP export is disabled; users switching back to OTLP must re-configure `otlpEndpoint`.

```suggestion
   {
     "telemetry": {
       "enabled": true,
       "outfile": ".qwen/telemetry.log"
     }
   }
   ```

   > **Note:** When `outfile` is set, OTLP export is automatically disabled.
   > The `target` and `otlpEndpoint` settings are not needed for file-only
   > output and can be safely removed from your config.
```

_— DeepSeek/deepseek-v4-pro via Qwen Code /review_

Author: Adopted — added a `> Note` after the file-output example clarifying that `outfile` automatically disables OTLP export in ddb5e8e.
